---
title: Narratives
---

The essays below narrate the history of places, people, events, and movements on the campuses of George Mason University and Old Dominion University. In many ways, the campus histories of GMU and ODU lend themselves well to comparison. Both are public, twentieth-century, Virginia institutions that began as extension colleges of larger universities (University of Virginia and the College of William and Mary, respectively). ODU was founded first, in 1930, as the Norfolk Division of the College of William and Mary, while GMU was founded in 1949 as the Northern Virginia University Center of the University of Virginia and moved to the Fairfax, Virginia campus in 1964. Both ODU’s urban campus in Norfolk and GMU's suburban campus in Fairfax experienced most of their campus growth and development in the second half of the twentieth century. By focusing on the campus histories of these two institutions, we explore how the planning of buildings for public higher education reflected social and political changes and shifting institutional priorities in the postwar decades.

The following narratives explore those campus history stories using multimedia source material, including digitized archival material, historical images, and audio clips of oral history interviews. One of our project's goals was to put archival sources in conversation with digital interactive maps. To that end, alongside the narration and sources, each essay includes an interactive map that allows the reader to visualize the spatial dimensions of the story. As you read each essay, click on the underlined text to navigate to that place on the map.